welcome to global forum a forum for
discussion of global issues from global
perspectives today we are going to
discuss the issue of the American Empire
his roadmap is changing focus and
exchanging internal balance of forces
divided three very distinguished friends
you know them already so I'm just going
to briefly mention their names and their
most recent books to my left is sitting
professor Michael Parenti whose latest
book is the Michael Parenti reader came
out last year he's author of numerous
books and most people know him as the
voice of critical inquiry into American
political affairs called contrary
notions and as main title is country
notions the Michael Franti reader book
came out last year next to him as
statically whose author of 22 books his
latest book is the dual Pakistan on the
flight path of American power again a
known person on the international media
truly a global speaker and global voice
right now and again we are very
delighted to have another friend in
company with us and again author of a
recent book the war conspiracy JFK 9/11
and the deep politics of the war
Professor Peter Dave Scott I'm very
pleased to have every one of you on this
table thank you for being here and my
main question today is what is the
American agenda for the world Hereafter
well this since 2001 when George Bush
was able to somehow attain the
presidency we've had a small group
behind him with a very clear agenda that
I'm talking about the neocons led
obviously by then by Donald Rumsfeld and
Dick Cheney and for 20 years these
people had been working on what they
call continuity of government plans
which have been which were actually
implemented on September the 11th 2001
we don't know exactly what was
implemented
description of the plans back in the 80s
when with Oliver North was for vast
centralization of power in the white
house and exclusion of both Congress and
the courts so that we now have things
that were advocated in the 80s
warrantless surveillance warrantless
detention and preparations from martial
law in this country this is a very big
change in the nature of American civil
life and of course it's positively or
William to call that continuity of
government when it's a change of
government but Co G is a real fact that
we have to deal with in this country now
and they also that same group that
you're talking about many of them and
that was Rumsfeld Cheney Abrams Cohen
Wolfowitz was were sent it in the
right-wing think tank called project for
a new American Century and they issued a
statement which by the way you can no
longer find on the Internet it's a
little bit yeah disappeared but the
statement was called rebuilding
America's defenses where they very
clearly said we have an unprecedented
opportunity to have a global lock on all
the world's resources and markets and
that's what they seem to be going for
that now they've reached the final
solution they could isolate break up or
or hamstring the other large powers
before I begged Article II on was it
correct understanding of their position
one that they can have this lock or
world resources secondly they can
indefinitely perpetuate American power
and domination and third they can try to
recreate the whole world in their own
image because the Devas and to dominate
not only America's opponents but also
their allies absolutely as sidelining
Europe in particular and I just one
qualification they said all of this may
be difficult to achieve absent a major
disaster a new Pearl Harbor American
public that doesn't look like they're
ready to commit
this grandiose plan and it's so really
that's why September the 11th 2001 is
and we're not iniquity well this is true
I agree with colleagues here but let's
just see what's actually happened they
went into Iraq thinking it would be a
cakewalk and it turned out to be a
disaster for them I was deeply shocked
denied and live in this country I live
in London I come here a lot but watching
the presidential debate
the first presidential debate between
Obama and McCain they were talking about
US debts the tragedy of over 4,000 US
soldiers killed in Iraq both of them
talked about the families the vets and I
said yeah it's a great pity these 4,000
lives plus should not have been lost but
I couldn't help thinking about the
million Iraqi lives lost we now know
that over a million Iraqis have died
under their watch we know that there are
two and a half million Iraqi refugees
seeking asylum wherever they can get it
we know that the entire social
infrastructure of that country has been
destroyed by this war so when I talk
about Iraq will think about Iraq I think
about what's being done to that country
and now a similar situation is
developing in Afghanistan but they are
having problems they know it essentially
what the war in Iraq has done is the
occupation of Iraq has done is made Iran
the regional power in that area there's
no doubt about it this has been the
direct a friend of the US occupation
they made the Iranians very strong and
in addition if I could say but it's
something that Iran is sought for many
many years they now have power over the
Shia in southern Iraq which has been one
of their strategic objectives being
handed to them on a plate by the United
States but let's look at one other
aspect of it which is that the United
States is millet
verily very strong but as we now see in
the whole of America knows that it is
economically rather weak the economy is
weak and this is bound to affect its
foreign policy too and secondly what we
are seeing is strong regional powers are
mimicking the United States saying if
you can do it if you can have
pre-emptive strikes we can - that's what
the Russians did in Georgia repeated the
exact mechanism of what the West did in
the former Yugoslavia you gave possible
independence at the Russians we want you
not to because we are now giving
independence to Abkhazia and South
Ossetia so not having any norms by which
the world can live is no longer working
the u.s. thought it could breach all
norms because it was the strong power
now others are saying if you can do it
we can do it tomorrow the Indians will
do it the day after the Chinese will do
it the Brazilians might do it in Latin
American then where will we be but the
fact that this is happening I'm sure is
giving you as policymakers some
thoughtful pause saying hang on a minute
what is going on and I just like to add
to that that what once America had ended
2,000 troops or more into Georgia it was
the end of the sort of auntaunt between
Russia and America of zones of influence
and now the Russians have just conducted
joint wargames with Venezuela in the
Caribbean this would have been
unthinkable in the old days but that the
whole Bush idea was a treatise or
something that gets in the way
international law international
tribunals we don't want anything to do
with that but they are suffering they
are suffering because in fact American
stability and American security has been
based on a world order which is
essentially being torn up by these Nyoka
but let's go to Iraq one more time and
look at what happened in Iraq the idea
was the overthrow the regime will bring
down the state and will reorganize the
state the region
and even the religion that was the whole
hope the gym change region gain and then
some extremists want to go and change
the religion even that's why Time
magazine in 2003 had a cover story said
should christians convert Muslims that
was the core story in their time
magazine and they showed ten thousand
ten thousand missionary that had gone to
Iraq one wonders will give down the
visas to go to Iraq at that time but
coming back we should hand let's talk
about the non-state actor that had come
out of this exercise there's a new
phenomena of non-state actors because
the assumption was you demolish the
state the job is done then you can
rebuild it but something popped out of
that that was a non-state actor and we
have seen non-state actors not only in
Iraq now but many many other places how
do we contemplate the role of non-state
actors in the future of the Middle East
and Beyond can I just back up a little
bit about them in the ministries your
missionary nation is you know of course
I don't have to tell you that
missionaries have often been the
handmaidens of imperialism for a few
hundred years in different places they
come in and they they put on their shell
and sell their particular God and that
God fits in with the colonizing power so
absolutely right act to that was a start
direct one in the sense that people are
not ready for that
they are not been defeated to the level
and not sort of you know made to regret
their own fate to a level where they
could be profit eyes in a member of
Christianity the Christian missionaries
will not have the success they have in
Central America as they're doing right
now and not in Iraq I don't think so
no but that's not the main issue right
I'm asking I'm asking at all of the
non-state actors first of all I would
like to respond to that question by
pointing this fundamental paradox of the
extreme right in this country the
neocons
they want a strong Empire but they're
hostile the whole idea of state
involvement so one of the countries
where we seen the rise of non-state
actors is this country we now have
private military companies with a great
deal of offloading of these former
business of conducting warfare out of
the Pentagon I
to to private companies some of which
are owned by people extreme right-wing
so they then make profits with public
dollars which then are folded back into
the American political process on the
extreme right when Rumsfeld came to the
Pentagon in 2001 he talked about the
enemy and the enemy was seventy thousand
Pentagon bureaucrats and he gave them
warning that he intended to redesign the
Pentagon so that those functions would
go out of the states somewhere else
again value because the Pentagon budget
has since then doubled more than doubled
the Erdogan bureaucracy has grown and
the amount of waste and corruption
unaccounted for funds trillions Isis as
increased yet trillions of it but you
know that raises the question that the
Empire feeds off the Republic and what
we've seen another victim of US
imperialism is the u.s. itself I mean
this country is falling apart and Notary
Chema's travel around I do I feel I'm
always in the same place I go to this
state that city that and I pick up the
paper and it's always the same City
Council facing budget crises a state and
facing record deficit this and that
cutbacks and there's cutbacks in that so
the Empire is literally devouring the
Republic and and and we see the what the
fact the near meltdown effects of that
are this past week but you see must be
the other side of non-state actors one
is of course neoliberalism privatizing
war creating companies linked to the
Pentagon with ex Pentagon people in Ex
senior people on the boards of these
companies a Blackwater is a big example
of that but it also serves another
purpose that they can no longer recruit
enough people to a totally volunteer
army in the third year second and third
year of the war in Iraq once the
resistance there had emerged the number
of people wanting to join the u.s. army
not the Air Force so much but the army
was right down there was panic
in the United States they were taking
people from National Guard in Vermont
who didn't join up for that and sending
them into Iraq so they had telling them
back and ya can turn yes and say and and
so they had to organize these the choice
was either to increase the mercenaries
that's what they are they call them
private contractors but good
old-fashioned word for this is
mercenaries people you buy to go and
kill in other parts of the world the
only other choice was to reintroduce
conscription and if they were to do that
the country would explode because
conscription is democratic in effect
every single family in the country and
they were not going to make that mistake
knowing what happened during the Vietnam
War
so they went for these mercenaries and
they're increasingly now going in that
direction in Afghanistan as well one one
other stream population stream they
tapped into it's a small one but it
should be mentioned are non-citizens and
immigrants they've actually put these
people in the military with the promise
that if they served they don't have
citizenship when they got out if they
got out all in one piece and meanwhile
Blackwater recruits from the former
dictatorships in Latin America so there
are a lot of veterans of Chile under
Pinochet who of course were trained in
all kinds of extreme activities who are
in Blackwater Blackwater hasn't just
been used in Iraq it was also used in
New Orleans after operated after as a
Katrina hurricane you had these very
dubious mercenaries armed and with power
to shoot and kill Americans not
necessarily even American citizens
behind gun Peter let me add a footnote
to what you just said I was in South
Africa a few years ago and speaking at a
meeting and someone sent me a note just
come in very excited evidently
the white South Africa
who tortured and killed Steve Biko the
Black Consciousness leader in South
Africa was fighting in Iraq and had just
been killed and they said could you just
read this news item as well I read it
out in the whole meeting erupted it was
he fighting is an American soldier or no
as a matter honey
and the mercenary but I think that that
point is really not nicely made that
what we have is Empire devouring the
Republic let's go to Middle East and
Beyond and see rise of the non-state
actor in the global fight against
hegemony and domination how's that
playing out well I'm not quite sure what
you mean but I mean by let's say Lebanon
we have Hezbollah I yes I mean non-state
actors popping up all over the place not
just one country well I think to go back
to one of our sources is Pakistan has
been very changed by the enormous amount
of American resources that were behind
is I the inter-services intelligence
agency and they in turn had their own
agenda which was not always the agenda
of civilian leaders in Pakistan and they
have put money into the training of
people to fight in Kashmir and India and
so Iran has been doing the same thing
there's a - precedent really for the
whole region that states had back powers
fighting elsewhere they believe that
Hamas was originally encouraged by
Mossad and the Americans is to the
counterweight to the PLO and El Fattah
yeah and it sort of blow it back in
their face that if you do this and
weaken the governments everywhere which
of course the Syria I think is now
stable but it had a terrible problem at
one time Lebanon is being twice at least
twice destroyed by these non-state
actors and of course to put the pieces
together again in Palestine is going to
be extremely difficult but at the same
time it's going to be
extremely difficult also to make
Palestinians fall in line just because
you happen to control or intimidate one
section whether facts I'm not going to
fall in my success so I think this
phenomenon own state attorneys to
examine if you look closely both at the
regional I wouldn't at the consider will
in at the movement level because the
idea was you topple the government you
bring into your fold Machado for anybody
else and the job is done now that's not
going to the case people are going to
fight a different ways and this one
thing feel in the flick on
characteristics well I think this is
happening and this is a process which
will start it of course in Pakistan and
Afghanistan during when the Russians
occupied Afghanistan the creation of
non-state groups by the ISI backed by
the United States at that time funded by
the United States to go and take on the
Russians has now become an epidemic I
mean that's when it will started all
these people the US are trying to forget
hold of now were people who fought with
them and it's always worth reminding
people of that for the following reason
that the mistakes that they made at that
time they are now repeating different
mistakes now which could have equally
sort of strong repercussions five six
years from now they never learn but what
is going on is that the groups now
fighting the United States inside
Afghanistan the British intelligence
refers to these as the nail Taliban they
say this is no longer the old
organization they have a global
perspective them basically it's a form
of Pashtun nationalism which is now
developing in that part of a month and
lots of ordinary Pistone's are joining
this group and transforming it because
they want to get rid of the occupation
we must if you know there are different
groups in different parts of the world
al Qaeda is not this native Taliban they
are a separate group who believe in
terror and organized terror but you know
in order to bear not the serious problem
for the United States at the moment at
the moment it's just a cycle
little problem for them the real problem
for them is the rise of the Pashtuns
underneath the umbrella of the Taliban
who have now made it impossible for the
United States to win this war they can
send a hundred thousand more troops
they're not going to win the war which
is why I think senator Obama is very
seriously misguided in the arguments
he's putting forward in this
presidential campaign
and-and-and making excuses because the
war in Afghanistan is going wrong saying
the reason it's going wrong is Pakistan
and let's cross over the border and
create a mess there too it's not going
to help in fact it is going to destroy
the stability of that country completely
and it's in a mess anyway as we know my
Gosling's my two by two most reliable
sources about anything that happens in
Central Asia one of them is sitting
right here to recovery early and the
other is my son Christian friend who's
been to Afghanistan about four or five
times much to my grief but he says that
the NATO forces are not leaving their
barracks except for the Americans
occasionally maybe but they they the
danger Germans or whatever the group
they just seal up in there and really
come peek out over them over the
sandbags sometimes they wait for the
weekends where they organize large
parties and fancy dress parties then
you're not going to win a war happen
well no and then there's of course the
problem of the drug traffic the mega the
Americans imported drug traffickers into
Afghanistan in 2001 they had connections
with them from the 1980s and in fact
American a census bears a very heavy
responsibility for the buildup of the
export of heroin out of Afghanistan now
93 percent of the world's heroin comes
from either Pakistan I mean Afghanistan
or the frontier provinces of Pakistan
and the bulk of US aid thanks to is I
went to one man Hekmatyar who in that
period was the number one drug
trafficker in the world with his own
heroin
labs in ISI controlled territory inside
Afghanistan 2001 after the Taliban for
at least a year had effectively outlawed
the it is possible they were able to do
it you know but we brought the United
States brought drug traffickers they
brought found one man in Dijon France
and said you have to come back we're
opening up the country again and of
course now the drug traffic is totally
out of control of the Americans and is
feeding and nourishing the Taliban so it
but also Peter US intelligence experts
and drug agency experts now say that
this Karzai government is also feeding
of the drug creatively that'll Garcia's
brother Xie is one of the big heroin
smugglers in the country yes and they
don't talk about that like this in the
world he is one yeah and also the fact
that Russians are playing a very
important role in facilitating and
letting it go through their territories
yes and therefore feeding the fire that
they has fielded all right now paying
back the Americans for what they had
done to them but again I want to ask you
how that plays out for the American
Empire in the sense of neocon agenda
what happens when unexpectedly you have
these mutant non-state actors coming up
or going to resist and fight against you
what happens then I think America's gone
from an offensive phase and roughly
speaking the first Bush at George W Bush
administration to now they're just
struggling to keep their heads above
water they the the amount of money
that's gone into the war is certainly a
factor in this domestic financial
meltdown that we're dealing with America
cannot really be for 50 years starting
after World War Two America's strength
was based on a balance between economic
dominance and military dominance and
roughly I would say with the Reagan era
they decided to go with military
dominance and then let the free market
take care of the rest
so America is now this has happened to
other powers too it happened to
that happened to the Netherlands Spain
you're left with an army which you
really can't afford anymore and in a and
the whole idea of controlling the world
cannot be done by armies of alone it's
the submitted civilian economy so it
can't and here America is now visibly
very weak and out you know indebted to
country the tolerance of countries like
China there are some immediate gains for
the Empire builders in Iraq it allowed
Bush to almost double the military
budget they went in and completely
privatized the economy they destroyed
the economy but they had special
committees to privatize it in Donald
Rumsfeld
I thought he used very amusing
interesting word he said it's a
Stalinist economy everything was
state-owned so they got rid of that they
got rid of the the French Chinese a
Brazilian Italian and Russian oil
prospecting contracts badnesses Saddam
Hussein was was cultivating it was only
British and American now were in on the
oil you know the other thing they have
contracts of is about a hundred
companies that have made the most
lucrative amounts of money on contracts
in Iraq I mean that's the biggest profit
area they've had in the last and also
them at them without a bidding process
because nobody like the biggest ones
e-ticket also you know Saddam was moving
in his last years towards accepting if
he shipped oil to Europe it was going to
be paid in you go I'm not to mention and
that really you know when I've been
saying since before we went into Iraq if
you say it's all about oil it isn't that
we want in America to have the Iraqi oil
is going to go elsewhere
we America wants to have control of the
global oil market and to maintain
something that was worked out with OPEC
and Saudi Arabia that all OPEC oil would
be paid for in dollars now that's very
anachronistic now and I think the the
collapse of the American
right in Iraq means that it's not going
to do Iran is another country that also
started to move towards paying in Euros
and that's when we started to hear that
America I want every story on that one
of the Arab American intellectuals one
time told one of the Saudi princes that
they should accept payment not only in
dollars but in a basket of currencies
and give them reason why this should do
that and the prince seemed to quite
impressed with that and then he met him
after few months is what came of that
idea I gave you few months ago said I
discuss with the American ambassador he
didn't like it so that might for that
idea but really coming back to the issue
that we have now yes the oil Holden oil
is strong and as the beginning of
urgency in his book game plan had said
the only leverage you have left over
Europe is control of oil if we lose that
control we lose Europe and we will go in
different ways different directions but
the same time the prospects for
increasing insurgency all over the
Muslim world is increasing and
decreasing how do you think neo-cons
take that into account yeah even though
they have the whole but whole seems to
be canvas so how are they going to make
it more permanent given that more they
hold on to it the more insurgency they
produce one of the things about the
neocons is that they they felt that it
wasn't important to know very much about
the country if you had a powerful agenda
you impose it then everything will work
out for example Wolfowitz said you won't
have a shia-sunni problem in iraq they
will all be grateful to have the
Americans impose a secular government I
don't think the neocons have much depth
in the area of how to relate to the
Muslim world and this is a very good
reason why we should get rid of them as
quickly as possible because over and
over you know between the State
Department and the Defense Department I
usually don't care much for a much for
either of them but certainly what the
State Department has been working for is
closer to what I would want to see than
the Pentagon the the neocon agenda was
to create a new State Department inside
the Pentagon
when Rumsfeld left out in vice president
Cheney's office and to simply bypass the
State Department it's going to be very
very bad for the whole world until you
eliminate the residues of that kind of
alternative government that was coming
out of changing but if you see any
possibility of that and yesterday's
presidential debate that any of that is
no there is narrow narrow parameters
even the compulsions of the Empire and
the new Empire regulators were like one
of them is going to be the next
president what possibilities do we see
well I mean this is the tragedy of the
United States as Michael was saying that
the Constitution has been violated the
Republic is under attack the diversity
that used to exist in this country I
mean I remember it well you know when
there's a foreign policy disaster like
Vietnam senator Fulbright at the Foreign
Relations Committee at the Senate called
them in and held them to account what
the hell is going on what are you doing
that's all gone I mean most of the
Democrats voted for this male con war we
shouldn't forget that there was a
consensus on this wall between the two
wings of the u.s. establishment Obama
did oppose it it's true but he was a
meaner Lukie or by and large the
Democratic Party leadership went along
for it Clinton came until the Labor
Party conference in Britain you've got
to back Blair so it's not simply the
nail consult the only problem one of the
problems we confront is that there is no
serious debate on foreign policy within
the mainstream establishment take Alice
time.this everyone knows is a serious
issue and especially after 9/11 you
would have thought it would be discussed
but the offensive of AIPAC and the
Israeli embassy has meant that in the
United States there has been no
clear-cut debate on the future of that
region and the future of the
Palestinians is of people and Israel's
own future
this should be being discussed by
politicians instead of scaremongering
Israel is going to be wiped out no one
can wipe out Israel it's got nuclear
weapons the only region the only country
in that region which has so it's these
absences and vacuums in American
politics that are very disturbing that
everything's being narrowed down and
democracy itself has increasingly become
a shell in which people function I mean
Obama had the opportunity to go on the
offensive but he was very careful very
cautious and on the question of Pakistan
Afghanistan even more aggressive than
McCain which was likely shocking it's
almost as if he was trying to say okay
I'm against the war in Iraq we should
have an exit strategy in Iraq but I'm
tough on Afghanistan at war yes I'm
tough on Afghanistan and go in there and
send the troops from Iraq into
Afghanistan and then where will you send
them from Afghanistan and that might be
quite acceptable to neocon for the
following reason the reason being that
the destruction that was meant for Iraq
is already done nothing more can be done
to gain anything so we leave that and
move elsewhere and do more damage so one
of the idea that seems to be at least in
the Arab state people think the neo-con
agenda is not so much a gene change or
region chain but to destroy States and
leave them as a rubble for next 20-30
years and that's a punishment event we
have not to change anything but to
destroy them to punish them I don't
think that was a you know maybe they
pro-israeli neo-cons that might have
been their agenda but I think naive so
it sounds were a number of people who
believed they could go in install a
secular government in Iraq which would
then become a platform for permanent US
bases in the area to replace the bases
which they had lost in Saudi Arabia
Qatar a very small country is not a
substitute so control of the oil and
control of the region dictated in the
game plan to have American
cases permanent bases in Iraq some
people say five some people say 13 or 30
but a chaos a country that was in rubble
in chaos would not be a secure platform
for those bases I I would like to say
that the this business of the narrowing
of the issues that can be debated there
are one or two left like whether we'll
have a health and that health skiing or
not the underlying that is being the
growth really the takeover of what
Eisenhower called the
military-industrial complex but the
American economy now has been so
militarized that it gives to both
parties and the result is what gore
Vidal aptly said is one party with two
right wings on property part whittling
yes yes sir but I think what I'm asking
you is it seems like in 2006 election
results indicated there was a die census
at the mass level and at the elite level
in the approach to war in Iraq but in
2008 the election process seems to be
used to rebuild that consensus to
continue with the present policy do you
read it that way I think inside the
Democratic Party there has been a lot of
Grise household making the party queue
to a line that is pro-israeli and they
you know there are dissenting voices in
the Democratic Party but all of the
progressive candidates that I would have
liked to seen elected in 2006 the
mainstream Democrats ran candidates
against them so that the Democratic
Party instead of being a real opposition
as being one of the ways of controlling
opinion and my explanation for that is
ultimately money you know that the money
is coming from the single source for
both parties and freezing out the the
real alternatives if this was a real
democracy I'm sure we will be able to
Iraq very quickly but I don't I don't
foresee that happening at all in the why
on
one party when you can own both of them
so you give any to both sides and they
can be bought so cheaply but there is
there has been over the last thirty
years a narrative that's been developing
and a message and a whole climate of
opinion and ideology and from the right
which has talked about the need for
military might
the need to ward off these external
enemies first was the Communists now
it's the terrorists and the like and the
Democrats are constantly being put in
the position of looking soft or not not
being as tough and so we last night we
rock Obama you know as that horrifying
expression of his will go in and take
them out or something like like he was a
ordering a hit from the mob or some that
sort of thing so the go so big tough
they live in constant fear that they are
not you know that they're that the
people are not going to have faith in
their ability to to lead in the world
and actually I think the rank-and-file
democrats are way ahead of their
leadership they don't want that kind of
thing when when democratic speakers at
the democratic national convention got
up and talked about getting our place
back and so that we can resume our role
as world leaders it was absolutely
silent that wasn't in the close line
these people don't want america to have
to be the world leader and there's no
dialogue about those assumptions what
why do we have to be the world leader
what does that mean to be a world leader
what about the taking care of things
here at home and the like it's very hard
to get that dialogue going and hear the
media or a problem that the media is so
much more concentrated mouths and they
were just even twenty years ago yeah and
so it's absolutely outrageous i mean
thank god we have the intricate internet
and there's a kind of clarity i me of
course there's all kinds of junk on the
internet but if you if you search on the
internet you can find an area of decent
debate and weighing of ideas but there's
a total disconnect between the
rationality of the internet and the
ideological
monopoly of the week on the NSM now all
of the mainstream media together have
become a single phenomenon you can't
expect any serious discussion from any
of them but given that there may be an
economic meltdown in this country will
it be simply because the media that they
need to label to delay down all these
more complex explanations that need to
be explored
well I think that you know the fact is
that the imposition of the Washington
Consensus the neoliberal economic system
policed by the top financial
institutions the World Bank the IMF the
WTO and behind the scenes the US
Treasury Department tried to remote the
world in the image of the United States
in Latin America which was the first
area where these experiments were
launched its imploded the US has never
been more isolated in South America
Vanity's today and not only from the
radical regimes of Chavez Morales Correa
and do go in now Paraguay where Bolivar
has been elected but also Lula in Brazil
and bascially in Chile who don't agree
with Chavez on everything but will not
allow themselves to be used by the u.s.
against Bolivia Venezuela that's
extremely important and that is an area
where the u.s. is now out of control
with the exception of Colombia which is
their only total term in that region
will say sustained by horrible blood
banks exactly executions and death
squads still to this day they're doing
it and so the financial prices in the
United States and what has happened with
the bubble bursting it's now being
discussed all over the world then what
they've been posed on us it's blown up
the German a German government minister
said well this is what they were
pressuring us to do crying god we didn't
mean the Germans didn't go all the way
the British did and there too now lots
of great unions right here what's
happened here because of that
unless a to answer your question the
powers of great unions were virtually
disappeared the American working class
with the deindustrialization did not
remain a force which it could have been
so on the social level the people who
could have taken up the issues of this
crisis are not there that's been a you
know one result of it but that doesn't
mean that these issues shouldn't be and
wouldn't be taken up by other people
hence this opposition to the bailout
coming from populist Republicans is
coming because they know their base and
they saying why the hell should we build
these crooks out that's what you're
doing and using our money to bail out
these guys and the corporations and this
is why a more social democratic plan on
the model of the New Deal would go down
much better that's what the Democrats
should be arguing for we're going to
give you a new deal a new dean here and
in the world
well my could you think that will be an
issue in the next direction I doubt it
I doubt it next election in 2008 was on
12 I mean two separate in November of
February
you know this social democratic which
Tariq mentions it's a very intriguing
term in 1978 I have it in one of my
books too there were a number of
financial leaders who said we've got to
do something about Jimmy Carter we've
got to do something this country is
moving toward a social democracy exactly
and we or even worse we don't we can to
the end and from 78 away they have been
whacking it down now in The New Yorker
magazine just a couple issues back I of
course I can't remember the exact
citation and all I'm not that good
anymore
but anyway they quoted there was an
article on the fact that the
conservatives in the Republican Party
are running out of issues like they
don't quite well there's still social
security because that's about and one or
two other things and gay marriage and
then that stuff with some people getting
bored with but one of these people said
one of the reasons we're running out of
issues is because we've won we prevented
America from
social democracy we used the same term
they know what they're doing they really
Hanna Jen and the Democrats something to
have a clue that it began I think is the
whole of the 70s with the lining down of
the Vietnam War there was a huge debate
among the upper class the ruling class
of America we come out as a youth I said
Marxism doesn't work very well in
applying to America it's worked very
well since the Reagan Revolution of
1980s last work but it absolutely class
war starting with the crushing of the
patco strike of the air control regime
but all of that was being hatched
through the 1970s the first recognition
with essential failure in Vietnam that
America was going to have to rethink its
role in the world and there was a debate
between what my friend Michael Claire
called the prussians and the traders the
people who said America has
traditionally been an economically
dominant power and should continue to do
that versus the people who said no we
need to have military military
superiority in order to maintain our
role in the world and the military
people were probably a minority in the
ruling class but they had much more
money from these big corporations like
hewlett-packard whose future really
depended on the big defense budget but
let's project a little further maybe 20
years from today then our number of
scholarly works by Kennedy by Neil
Ferguson at Halliburton others and there
are CIA studies by National Intelligence
Council mapping the global future we'd
say then 20-year the world is going to
go from unipolar to multipolar Chinese
economy will expand beyond American
expand economy
and there will be many powers of center
that will compete with the United States
given that's going to happen maybe in 20
years combined into the fact that the
people in this country the demographic
composition of this country is also
changing Latino population is going to
you very large component Asian to Asian
- and also that the two generations of
retired people mostly will be European
Americans and most of people working
will be people of color so given the
dynamics of change internally
externally how do we see this Empire
playing out next 20 years
what's the scenario for its and the next
two decade which is not a very long time
in the life of nations
well next 20 years that that's a crystal
ball and we do you use me because I just
say first of all there are two
alternative scenarios one is with a
major war and the other is with out now
of course we would hope for the second
alternative and which would mean a rapid
return to multilateralism a change of
policy in Washington in this respect and
I think the Democrats are capable of
that I don't think they the Democrats
are really wedded to the notion of
unilateral dominance to the same extent
as the Republicans and even really a
faction of the Republicans the neocon
section but absent some kind of rapid
return to respect for international law
international treaties everything that
George W Bush tore up when he first came
in in 2000 we don't get that kind of
initiative from America then I think
first of all the risks of war in the
world are very big and the risks of that
expanding into say if America continues
to act as it does now and rise Russia
and China together which is not really
the situation at present as we saw in
Georgia then it's it's up to America
really to take the first steps to avoid
that kind of risk for war because it is
true that Bush after 9/11 and neocons
totally backed by the Likud Party in
Israel and AIPAC decided to go for break
you know fight Iraq occupy Afghanistan
all that sort of stuff
but at the same time I think it's worth
noting that there is a continuity
between the previous administration I
agree
Clinton totally ignored the United
Nations when he used later to bomb
Yugoslavia it was under the Clinton
Albright administration of sanctions
against Iraq which wrecked many many
things in that country and killed
you know half a million kids took place
without causing any big flurry in the
world in the Western world at large but
so I think there are some problems here
but whether the Democrats would be able
to pull out the owner of my book you go
back further to the previous Democratic
President Carter the Carter was actually
elected on a campaign promise to cut the
defender buyback and under his
presidency thanks to the Rockefeller
inspired leadership as being the friggin
ski in the National Security Council he
presided over what we think of is the
Reagan budget increases but were
actually drafted and planned under
Carter there has been this continuance
in the last in the last two years of his
term that's when he made this wiki who
gotten the word that this is not this
way this where you go that's when he
started cutting back on Human Services
and started increasing military spending
but there has been this trend continuous
xyo better water bringing before Reagan
- thanks Zack yes and so that is a
remains a central problem in American
politics but what will happen over the
next 25 years one thing is just beyond
dispute that China today is the workshop
of the world
that's what Western policies have
created virtually everything you see is
made in China and from that point of
view it's a situation which is analogous
to the role played by Britain in the
19th century after the Industrial
Revolution so what impact is this going
to have on the world at large is the
Chinese economy not totally dominated by
the free market as we know full well but
with state intervention as well is going
to move on and on what impact will it
let me tell you that when the United
States announced that it wanted bases in
perpetuity in Afghanistan and the nATO
Secretary General job Scheffer told the
Brookings Institution that the reason
we're in Afghanistan is it's not
nation-building or good governance and
not even really al-qaeda it's because
Afghanistan is a strategically important
country on the borders with China Iran
and there were riots in every Afghan
city because people didn't want it and
for the first time ever once that
happened
China and Russia carried out joint
military maneuvers in that region not
noticed by the US press but I cite all
the facts in in my latest book so it's
not that they don't see what's going on
and do not underestimate China Pakistan
for instance is run or not run but
they're three big lobbies in Pakistan
the American Lobby which is currently
running the country the Saudi Lobby
which operates more in a more shifty way
through ways politicians and the China
Lobby which operates exclusively within
the military makes no proposals on the
politics of the country stays I to the
country's internal life and the Chinese
had made it very clear to the Pakistani
military we are not going to tolerate
permanent US bases on our border like
the Russians did when they started
putting missiles in threatening to put
missiles in Poland hasn't hasn't
happened yet yeah it hasn't happened yet
so I think the US and its allies are
going to find the growing difficult if
they carry on in this way trying to
remake the world in their own image when
their own world is collapsing that's the
key thing so it's the crash the economic
crash combined with the crisis in
Afghanistan and Iraq
is going to make this a model which no
one wants to even look at seriously
including within the European country
let me have a very last question
do we see the possibility of an
international civil society coming to
the fore and playing a role of
restraining vampires in the intervening
period between now and twenty five years
when the world will be different world
and hopefully better regulated do we can
you and I know that really we saw that
some of that in February 2003 before
before the u.s. women attacked Iraq I've
never seen demonstrations against a war
before it ever started so leather after
the bombs start falling then they react
and I like that but it was global
we saw demonstrations in Osaka Japan in
Finland and Lithuania in Mexico Nigeria
these are countries that don't have a
really close cultural or historical link
to Iraq at all but they were saying they
were they were serving notice saying you
can't be the rulers of the planet you
can't decide who shall live and who
shall die which country you can attack
with impunity and which one you can't
and so that they demonstrated out of
Iraq out of regard for Iraq but also at
a regard for themselves and even among
the American people and they're not
sufficiently frightened and reality
seeps in a little bit there really is a
reluctance to pursue these follow-up
Wars you've got to keep frightening them
and saying that terror is going to get
you going to get your mama going on and
you know the right under your bed but
they really are many of them are
concerned about health care and housing
and this whole meltdown that's now
taking place I just had a friend of mine
right send me an email saying his
solution for this thing is don't spend
the seven hundred billion dollars let
the free market play itself i he had two
solutions the first was let the free
market play itself out and the second
solution involved guillotines but he
didn't then he didn't go into that one
I'd like to say I am very pessimistic is
wrong right I'm very concerned that we
are in a period
where war is a real possibility at the
same time I'm saying well we're in three
wars right now yes but more Russia
something yes something a bit much
bigger because we've had Wars pretty
constantly years ever since America
summoned up its mate and invaded Grenada
we have had and then Panama it's been
building and building but that's the
attack its Grenada pound they have never
attacked us I'm going to have nuclear
powers any wave their weapons that was a
premise to saying that I'm really quite
hopeful for the bitly the long term is
clearly on the side of international
comity and civil society because of the
infrastructure that we're now getting
the internet allows people to
communicate all around the world it
Americans are forced otherwise to choose
being The Washington Post in the New
York Times they can get on the internet
and read the European press the British
press the Pakistani press this is a
necessary condition for a for a global
society and it's a huge breakthrough and
of course there's always the risk that
the the successors to the neocons will
take away freedom of the internet we
have to watch for that but they trend is
though in the world is towards a more
egalitarian sharing of knowledge and
communications breaking down the
monopolies that are being exercised by
the major powers so yes the answer to
your question despite the risk of war is
we are moving in that direction of an
ideological side well I hope that
international civil society gets its act
together because as has been said they
came out to stop the Iraq war but when
they failed they went in again and that
was very demoralizing the fact that they
had failed and most people who came out
had never participated in any political
act before they were huge these
demonstrations and they had an impact I
think that in some ways
the most important segment of
international civil society are the
citizens of the United States of America
I don't want to exaggerate this but I
think in the future does depend on how
they develop and so one has to fight for
civil liberties in the United States of
people who are allowed to express their
opinions we are seeing as you mentioned
earlier a transformation of this society
in terms of who lives here their
composition their color their religions
it's no longer a single society and
these people over the next 25 to 30
years especially the kids born in this
country are going to play a role one
hopes and not be cowed down by the
rulers and that could begin to change
the United States itself you know the
fact that you now have a bread wrapper
mannan tridge of Latinos who are
interested in what's going on back home
they look like the early immigrants who
couldn't had no access to news or
internet didn't know what was going on
at home the immigrants who came from
Italy in the early years so to say last
century these people coming here had
links with Mexico with Venezuela with
Central America so you had a permanent
picket outside the Mexican Consulate in
LA when they were repressing the
citizens of Oaxaca and now I think it's
a sign of hope and you had a you know a
sizable minority of American Muslims who
who live in this country and who play a
big role in keeping the hospital's going
you know play their part in citizens
paying their and English large enough
engineers and and engineer and these are
people who have to play a role in
society and if they don't their kids
will and the Empire does have regards
your look but or the Empire does have an
Achilles heel this global Empire
to the manpower we talk to the truth
policy we'll already talked about that
they're running short of troops and
they're fighting only two little wars I
mean really - second great wars and
they're and they're having a hard time
feeding this global war machine so there
are vulnerabilities in this Empire we're
looking at its immense abuses and
strengths we should also look at these
public absolutely I think the whole
project of the neocons can be summed up
with the title of similan contains two
books the clash of civilization and also
his new book relatively new book called
who we are one is directed towards
others in countries and civilizations
other is directed towards minorities in
this country particularly Latino
minority and I think partly the future
of this country is going to be shaped by
the answered majority of people give to
Simon Huntington's two challenges are we
going to be a permanent war with the
rest of the world or are we going to
exclude and quarantine and oppress
minorities in this country particularly
Latinos who are in the position of
becoming majorities in several states
this discussion will friendly continue
in many other settings thank you thank
you sir
[Music]
you